feat: add autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer usage (#557)
autowarefoundation/autoware-documentation: docs/datasets/data-anonymization/index.md

# Rosbag2 Anonymizer

## Overview

> Autoware provides a tool to anonymize ROS2 bag files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Autoware provides a tool to anonymize ROS 2 bag files.
```

This tool is useful when you want to share your data with Autoware community but want to keep the privacy of the data.

With this tool you can blur any object (faces, license plates, etc.) in your bag files, and you can get a new bag file
with the blurred images.

## Installation

### Clone the repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer.git

> ```

Reviewer 2: After clonning the repository user need to go to downloaded folder 
![image](https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware-documentation/assets/112626902/58223183-1d70-46e8-b697-2f29962f4e08)
For further downloads of pretrained models need to be in the autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer folder.

### Download the pretrained models

```bash
wget https://dl.fbaipublicfiles.com/segment_anything/sam_vit_h_4b8939.pth

wget https://huggingface.co/ShilongLiu/GroundingDINO/resolve/main/GroundingDINO_SwinB.cfg.py
wget https://huggingface.co/ShilongLiu/GroundingDINO/resolve/main/groundingdino_swinb_cogcoor.pth

wget https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/releases/download/v0.0.0/yolov8x_anonymizer.pt
```

### Install ros2 mcap dependencies if you will use mcap files

!!! warning

>     Be sure you have installed the ROS2 on your system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Be sure you have installed the ROS 2 on your system.
```

yolo:
  epochs: 100 # Number of epochs for the YOLOv8 model (int)
  model: "yolov8x.pt" # Select the base model for YOLOv8 ('yolov8x.pt' 'yolov8l.pt', 'yolov8m.pt', 'yolov8n.pt')
```

- `config/yolo_anonymize.yaml`

```yaml
rosbag:
  input_bag_path: "path/to/input.bag" # Path to the input ROS2 bag file with 'mcap' or 'sqlite3' extension
  output_bag_path: "path/to/output/folder" # Path to the output ROS2 bag folder
  output_save_compressed_image: True # Save images as compressed images (True or False)
  output_storage_id: "sqlite3" # Storage id for the output bag file (`sqlite3` or `mcap`)

yolo:
  model: "path/to/yolo/model" # Path to the trained YOLOv8 model file (`.pt` extension) (you can download the pre-trained model from releases)
  config_path: "path/to/input/data.yaml" # Path to the config file of the dataset, which is created in the previous step
  confidence: 0.15 # Confidence threshold for the YOLOv8 model (float)

blur:
  kernel_size: 31 # Kernel size for the Gaussian blur (int)
  sigma_x: 11 # Sigma x for the Gaussian blur (int)
```

## Usage

> The tool provides two options to anonymize images in ROS2 bag files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tool provides two options to anonymize images in ROS 2 bag files.
```

### Option 1: Anonymize with Unified Model

You should provide a single rosbag and tool anonymize images in rosbag with a unified model. The model is a combination
of GroundingDINO, OpenCLIP, YOLOv8 and SegmentAnything. If you don't want to use pre-trained YOLOv8 model, you can
follow the instructions in the second option to train your own YOLOv8 model.

You should set your configuration in config/anonymize_with_unified_model.yaml file.

```bash
python3 main.py config/anonymize_with_unified_model.yaml --anonymize_with_unified_model
```

### Option 2: Anonymize Using the YOLOv8 Model Trained on a Dataset Created with the Unified Model

#### Step 1: Create a Dataset

> Create an initial dataset with the unified model. You can provide multiple ROS2 bag files to create a dataset. After

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an initial dataset with the unified model. You can provide multiple ROS 2 bag files to create a dataset. After
```

running the following command, the tool will create a dataset in YOLO format.

You should set your configuration in config/yolo_create_dataset.yaml file.

```bash

> python3 main.py config/yolo_create_dataset.yaml --yolo_create_dataset

Reviewer 2: YOLO config file is missing. Could you share a config file in release?

Reviewer: It was set resolved, but I still got the following error when I tried to run this command:

```
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/home/mitsudome-r/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/main.py", line 81, in <module>
    yolo_create_dataset(
  File "/home/mitsudome-r/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/tools/yolo_create_dataset.py", line 28, in yolo_create_dataset
    unified_language_model = UnifiedLanguageModel(config_data, json_data)
  File "/home/mitsudome-r/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/model/unified_language_model.py", line 47, in __init__
    self.yolo_model_name = config["yolo"]["model"]
KeyError: 'yolo'
```

It seams like it is expecting yolo parameters defined in yolo_create_dataset.yaml, but it is not defined in the default configuration file.

Author: I apologize, I missed that. I have added the missing variable and also included an `if` statement to check if the YOLO model exists. If users haven't downloaded the pre-trained model, it will still work.

related commit: https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/commit/9ea65e1c8a9359626c95cba2f1df68102ebd645b

```

#### Step 2: Manually Label the Missing Labels

The dataset which is created in the first step has some missing labels. You should label the missing labels manually.

#### Step 3: Split the Dataset

Split the dataset into training and validation sets. Give the path to the dataset folder which is created in the first
step.

```bash
autoware-rosbag2-anonymizer-split-dataset /path/to/dataset/folder
```

#### Step 4: Train the YOLOv8 Model

Train the YOLOv8 model with the dataset which is created in the first step.

You should set your configuration in config/yolo_train.yaml file.

```bash
python3 main.py config/yolo_train.yaml --yolo_train
```

> #### Step 5: Anonymize Images in ROS2 Bag Files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 5: Anonymize Images in ROS 2 Bag Files
```

Anonymize images in ROS 2 bag files with the trained YOLOv8 model. If you want to anonymize your ROS 2 bag file with only
YOLOv8 model, you should use following command. But we recommend to use the unified model for better results. You can
follow the Option 1 for the unified model with the YOLOv8 model trained by you.

You should set your configuration in config/yolo_anonymize.yaml file.

```bash

> python3 main.py config/yolo_anonymize.yaml --yolo_anonymize

Reviewer 2: Some debug comments left on the 'autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/tools/yolo_anonymize.py'.

Author: ```
0: 416x640 2 license plates, 151.4ms
Speed: 3.7ms preprocess, 151.4ms inference, 132.2ms postprocess per image at shape (1, 3, 640, 640)
```

If you mentioned about these outputs, these comes from YOLO and I thought these looks nice.

Reviewer 2: No, I mentioned about [these](https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/blob/a87dd7a2cf59fb1883205a9203dc8607dd02e5a4/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/tools/yolo_anonymize.py#L65) debug comments. Also there are debug comments left on some other [[1]](https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/blob/a87dd7a2cf59fb1883205a9203dc8607dd02e5a4/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/tools/anonymize_with_unified_model.py#L73) [[2]](https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/blob/a87dd7a2cf59fb1883205a9203dc8607dd02e5a4/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/tools/yolo_create_dataset.py#L84C1-L97C29) files as well.

Author: I have some future plan on these debug parts which are comment right now, I think it can be stay for now.

# Rosbag2 Anonymizer

## Overview

Autoware provides a tool ([autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer](https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer)) to anonymize ROS 2 bag files.
This tool is useful when you want to share your data with Autoware community but want to keep the privacy of the data.

With this tool you can blur any object (faces, license plates, etc.) in your bag files, and you can get a new bag file
with the blurred images.

## Installation

### Clone the repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer.git
cd autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer
```

### Download the pretrained models

```bash
wget https://dl.fbaipublicfiles.com/segment_anything/sam_vit_h_4b8939.pth

wget https://huggingface.co/ShilongLiu/GroundingDINO/resolve/main/GroundingDINO_SwinB.cfg.py
wget https://huggingface.co/ShilongLiu/GroundingDINO/resolve/main/groundingdino_swinb_cogcoor.pth

wget https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/releases/download/v0.0.0/yolov8x_anonymizer.pt

> wget https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/releases/download/v0.0.0/yolo_config.yaml

Author: I added citation information both [README.md](https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/blob/main/README.md) and the end of the documentation.

```

### Install ROS 2 mcap dependencies if you will use mcap files

!!! warning

    Be sure you have installed the ROS 2 on your system.

```bash
sudo apt install ros-humble-rosbag2-storage-mcap
```

### Install `autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer` tool

Before installing the tool, you should update the pip package manager.

```bash
python3 -m pip install pip -U
```

Then, you can install the tool with the following command.

```bash
python3 -m pip install .
```

## Configuration

> Define prompts in the validation.jsonfile. The tool will use these prompts to detect objects. You can add your prompts

Author: fixed.

  output_save_compressed_image: True # Save images as compressed images (True or False)
  output_storage_id: "sqlite3" # Storage id for the output bag file (`sqlite3` or `mcap`)

yolo:
  model: "path/to/yolo/model" # Path to the trained YOLOv8 model file (`.pt` extension) (you can download the pre-trained model from releases)
  config_path: "path/to/input/data.yaml" # Path to the config file of the dataset, which is created in the previous step
  confidence: 0.15 # Confidence threshold for the YOLOv8 model (float)

blur:
  kernel_size: 31 # Kernel size for the Gaussian blur (int)
  sigma_x: 11 # Sigma x for the Gaussian blur (int)
```

## Usage

The tool provides two options to anonymize images in ROS 2 bag files.

### Option 1: Anonymize with Unified Model

You should provide a single rosbag and tool anonymize images in rosbag with a unified model. The model is a combination
of GroundingDINO, OpenCLIP, YOLOv8 and SegmentAnything. If you don't want to use pre-trained YOLOv8 model, you can
follow the instructions in the second option to train your own YOLOv8 model.

You should set your configuration in config/anonymize_with_unified_model.yaml file.

```bash

> python3 main.py config/anonymize_with_unified_model.yaml --anonymize_with_unified_model

Reviewer: When I tried running this command, I got the following error message:

```
torch.OutOfMemoryError: CUDA out of memory. Tried to allocate 1024.00 MiB. GPU 0 has a total capacity of 10.87 GiB of which 1010.88 MiB is free. Including non-PyTorch memory, this process has 8.66 GiB memory in use. Of the allocated memory 8.21 GiB is allocated by PyTorch, and 266.44 MiB is reserved by PyTorch but unallocated. If reserved but unallocated memory is large try setting PYTORCH_CUDA_ALLOC_CONF=expandable_segments:True to avoid fragmentation.  See documentation for Memory Management  (https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/notes/cuda.html#environment-variables)
```

The error disappeared after setting the environment variable as suggested (`export PYTORCH_CUDA_ALLOC_CONF=expandable_segments:True`). If this is expected, it might be user friendly to add in the instruction to set the variable first before running the command.

Author: I knew this error was caused by the GPU running out of memory, but I didn't know it could be resolved this way. Thank you. I’ve added it under a new 'Troubleshooting' section.

Author: btw, 'Troubleshooting' section add both package `readme.md` and documentation page.

  output_save_compressed_image: True # Save images as compressed images (True or False)
  output_storage_id: "sqlite3" # Storage id for the output bag file (`sqlite3` or `mcap`)

yolo:
  model: "path/to/yolo/model" # Path to the trained YOLOv8 model file (`.pt` extension) (you can download the pre-trained model from releases)
  config_path: "path/to/input/data.yaml" # Path to the config file of the dataset, which is created in the previous step
  confidence: 0.15 # Confidence threshold for the YOLOv8 model (float)

blur:
  kernel_size: 31 # Kernel size for the Gaussian blur (int)
  sigma_x: 11 # Sigma x for the Gaussian blur (int)
```

## Usage

The tool provides two options to anonymize images in ROS 2 bag files.

### Option 1: Anonymize with Unified Model

You should provide a single rosbag and tool anonymize images in rosbag with a unified model. The model is a combination
of GroundingDINO, OpenCLIP, YOLOv8 and SegmentAnything. If you don't want to use pre-trained YOLOv8 model, you can
follow the instructions in the second option to train your own YOLOv8 model.

You should set your configuration in config/anonymize_with_unified_model.yaml file.

```bash

> python3 main.py config/anonymize_with_unified_model.yaml --anonymize_with_unified_model

Author: Added a information to source workspace which includes custom message types.

related commits:
- https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware-documentation/pull/557/commits/d9a4c3e87643523045724731a20e6cf00e1ee072
- https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_rosbag2_anonymizer/commit/0532ef245626b4fc794ee863bba552a6f18c23c3

```

### Option 2: Anonymize Using the YOLOv8 Model Trained on a Dataset Created with the Unified Model

#### Step 1: Create a Dataset

Create an initial dataset with the unified model. You can provide multiple ROS 2 bag files to create a dataset. After
running the following command, the tool will create a dataset in YOLO format.

You should set your configuration in config/yolo_create_dataset.yaml file.

```bash
python3 main.py config/yolo_create_dataset.yaml --yolo_create_dataset
```

#### Step 2: Manually Label the Missing Labels

> The dataset which is created in the first step has some missing labels. You should label the missing labels manually.

Reviewer: Is there a tool that we can use to add missing labels?
